So the tape is on and so everything is recorded for posterity.
Okay, now turn the tape off just a second.
I forgot now, so it is on now.
So I'll start off by asking you a little bit about your background, specifically how you
grew up and what might have influenced you to write and why science fiction particularly.
I grew up in a very literary family with an influence on technology.
My father restructured the Boeing paperwork stuff when the ad odyssey airport space,
when we had missiles up here in the 50s.
So there was a lot of military people around my house and I took people in pilots,
submarine guys, stuff like that.
So I met a lot of people like this very early on.
When I was seven, I started reading science fiction.
But before that, my mother's a master's in education.
My father went to Harvard and my bedtime stories when I was three and four were like fairy queen.
So I had a, and mythology, so I had a real good background in not only literature,
but in particular sorts of literature that ended up translating into science fiction and fantasy later on.
I read fiction voraciously.
I got a part cover book a week with my allowance when I was in the second and third grade.
Being an over-advantaged child in a public school is very difficult for gifted children.
I had really nothing to do in school.
I was finished with, you know, the years of reading in October and I would sit.
They would make me just sit there.
So I did a lot of extracurricular reading.
And when I was, and I think the first story I read was James Glitch's surface tension.
I was now dating myself.
I think it was an if magazine way, way back.
And I read science fiction almost exclusively until I started reading nonfiction of philosophy about 10 and 11.
And then at the same time, I went through the five libraries within driving distances,
collection of mythology.
So I had all the myths of all available countries, including Asian and African by then,
then went into philosophy and worked backwards from the existentialists and started on back,
bounced all the way back to pre-socratic thought, got into physics from there, okay?
So it was kind of, and that got me back to my science group.
And then the interaction really of philosophy and theoretical physics in the space-time thing.
And then to later into geopronometry, which is an area which I really like to play with.
And some of that I think shows in the books when in my late twenties I got involved with a physicist,
who because he was doing some work in quantum mechanics was interested to see if indeed he could come up with some,
some reversibility, some evidence that the hours of time do go both ways.
There should be, if indeed this is true, on some level, even though your watch won't put itself together,
if it's broken on the floor, it's flying up and landing on your wrist, there should be some way that we can determine
that time is indeed working both ways.
And it's an iteration in math.
To do that, I punched a lot of buttons because I mean, I have card dreams that come true.
It's really unfortunate for somebody as logical as I am to be slapped in the face with pre-cardinal dreams
and incidences of ESP, so then I went into studying that a little bit.
And we did a bunch of computer work really testing against probability to see if indeed
mind could be demonstrated to be affecting probability in a randomly generated sequence of numbers.
And after about a year working on that, we proved our satisfaction that something was happening.
And it seemed to be happening most strongly and most consistently in people who were in some way or form connected
with nonverbal arts, musicians, artists, people who paint as opposed to all sorts of artists,
but people who are not logically tied down in some way to semantics.
Later on, we went and tried on the basis of that research together at National Science Foundation grant study.
But it was right about the time they were trying to throw the psychologist out of the National Science Foundation.
Consequently, we did not get the grant and didn't carry it on any further.
Is that answering your question?
That's a good start.
OK. You have this remarkable background then in reading all sorts of philosophy and that sort of thing,
and you are interested in science. Are you a logical kind of left hemisphere person?
Most determinedly. The other stuff bothers me very much because I like to be able to figure things out
and because most things fall to logic in the end.
The things that are illogical tend to be what I concentrate on because after one solves what's solvable,
what remains is the question. The things that one can't determine.
And that's sort of back to the nature really of time and what consciousness is.
The role of the observer in not only the modern world, but maybe in the actual creation of what we see as the rational and physical world around us.
So that's what I'm working with, struggling to deal with maybe in the future.
OK. This is as an aside, but as I mentioned on the phone the other night, I make my living as a scientist,
but as a layman I'm very interested in cosmology and quantum mechanics and that sort of thing.
So I think that's probably why your writing appeals to me so much because you investigate some of these things that I can't verbalize nearly as well.
You know, as another side is a book that you might be familiar with from being to be coming by Ilya Prigogini. I think you pronounce it.
Yes, that's how you pronounce it. He's one of my heroes.
Have you seen that book?
I have seen the book. I do not have a copy of it.
You know, his area is really your area of chemistry and thermodynamics and he's dealing in that book with the kind of questions that also interest you.
Oh, I think it's nice for you to take a look at.
OK. I appreciate the suggestion. He won the Nobel in I think 77. Plus he comes to Austin. He's part-time at UT Austin too, so it's not that far away.
In it he's really coming to terms with the same kinds of problems that I mean, are there determinable instances?
Is it one flow of time? Why, indeed, isn't this happening? Why don't we see reversibility in nature?
And almost calling for a restructure of the questions, which is nice. Very bright. Very bright, John.
Oh, yeah, of course. His main bag is non-equilibrium thermodynamics where you get...
Oh, I guess there's a big argument that the creationists can throw up that life cannot have evolved spontaneously because entropy makes it go the other way.
You tend towards disorder and he has refuted that quite nicely. I've read quite a few of those papers.
So, OK. I guess I ought to stick to... Let's see.
Yeah, it's not going to interest you. It's not going to always...
Well, part of my kick in this is this kind of stuff. Of course, the author on the other end might not want to stay forever, so...
I don't mind it. Weal or two, you would like...
Oh, yeah, I'm very familiar. I've read a lot of his stuff.
I really like that the universe ordered itself as it did in the initial instance in order to produce physicists. I think it's just wonderful.
Yeah. Let's see. Who is it? The anthropomorphic principle?
The anthropomorphic principle, right.
Yeah, right. That's quite interesting. And then the mini-worlds... One more clue. Let's see. The DeWitt model. It's called the mini-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. It's quite interesting. You are probably familiar with it.
Yeah, I was thinking of fooling around with that next time. It's just awful hard to use a structure like that in a book because it's going to not look like a novel. It's going to look like lots of parts of the novel.
Right. Especially since quantum mechanics says that the mini-worlds could not communicate amongst each other, but maybe you can find a way to get around that and then it would be quite interesting.
It would be writing really parallel to the structure, but it would be fun to do. It would be a lot... That's what I think science fiction should do, is deal with the new concepts rather than just older, rehab, science fictional concepts.
Because the really creative stuff is starting to happen now because people are asking much more interesting questions than scientists' level.
In the Patchin review article, the second one where you signed your name, you talked about scientific speculation and that perhaps it's not... Even the science fiction writers have grown conservative about speculating about science.
That was written a couple of years ago. I guess do you still feel pretty strongly about that?
Yeah, I'm afraid that I do. Because of the way I work and the amount of concentration an area takes, right now I just got finished with Michael Thompson and the whole RASC and STAN thing, biochemical warfare and surveillance stuff.
So I've been reading... That's what I've been reading for the last year. Really, the technology that is here now in depth. So if somebody... What happens is the fiction reading suffers. What I don't get to read when I'm researching a subject is what other people are writing because it's so peripheral to what I'm doing.
So if somebody in the last couple of years has come along and science fiction is taking risks and taking shots and using the new data that's coming in, then I don't know about it.
But as of two years ago, when I was really in person with school with writing and what they were writing, it seemed to me that they were almost ignorant of anything that one would consider an advance in the theory of science that has happened in the last 20 years.
I think that's really a shame because that's what science fiction is supposed to do. We have a brighter audience. They're at an age where they're deciding what they're going to do a lot of the times for a living.
They're comfortable with technology and they're adventurous. And to not give a question in mind something interesting to chew on, which is what I found was nice about science fiction when I first started reading it, is a shame.
To some extent, the problem is in the editors and publishers, but they can't buy a better book than you send them. So if people are sending them garbage, then garbage is all they can buy.
I mean garbage from a conceptual point of view. There's plenty of people in science fiction that can write, but there's very few of them that are writing about anything interesting.
And what I try to do always is to put in, if not leading edge stuff, new stuff, make the hard stuff simple, at least science that is still viable as a speculation. I really like Twisters. I just love Ken Rosen, the whole Twister theory thing that makes great sense to me.
And I wanted to give people some exposure to it, but there's always a new thought, a new permutation, something more interesting than, I mean I was complaining about tacky-ons because I think tacky-ons are a dead issue.
And considering especially the source, that the writer, who is certainly aware of more modern and interesting concepts than tacky-ons, could have done better.
And if the best of the writers that we have, in the sense of the most technologically literate, aren't going to do it, then nobody's going to do it and the level will go down and down.
As it's been going down in all fiction, I mean it's a conservative market. They want to buy what they can sell. They're absolutely sure that everybody that buys these books is eight years old and I know that they're not.
So I write for my ideal audience, which is intelligent and adventurous.
Okay, I think what I'm going to do now, okay I'll go back up to, and we'll start on Solistra.
This is, yes, oh yes, it's great. I keep debating if I start backwards because I had a question that's in from Cruiser Dreams that has the same thing to do with that.
Yeah, but I'll do it chronologically. It'll be easier.
Okay, reportedly, or it says in the back of the first Solistra book that you had written one short story before you wrote The High Couch of Solistra.
So how did you go from writing one short story to a very successful science fantasy novel?
Okay, I actually didn't even write it beforehand. I wrote this tiny short story called An Ant Dreaming and I wrote it between, I guess, between Winfrey New Bist and the Golden Sword just to peg the idea and open the door so I could get back into that thing that I saw.
I can see a story, the concepts, or one thing, you put the concepts in and they just, and then you have, I don't have to look around for a story. I mean, I see characters. I don't sit down there to write until I see something.
And it's almost like you're looking into a telescope and the story is at the other end, so there's a degree of automatic writing in it. But I always knew I was going to write.
You know, you win a poetry contest in the first grade and you always get an A on the essay question. There's a certain sign. I don't think you can learn to write. I think you're either a writer or you're not.
You can learn to be an author, someone who writes just enough to be able to go around and talk about their books and be a big shot or a literary snob.
The person who likes is willing to sit in their room and spend most of their time in a non-existent world and make very good friends with a typewriter or a word processor. That's something that you have to be born with the drive and the obsession to do.
So I did a lot of life research before I sat down to write anything because I felt that you have to have something to say. And having survived my research, when we moved to a quiet place, and I actually had the time and I found that I did have a specific idea.
I sat down and wrote Solishtrin. I didn't do any warm-up. That is the first thing I ever wrote for sale. And it's also the first draft or the first thing I ever wrote. It never occurred to me that a story could go any way but the original way.
So I wrote it and I typed it up and it sat around for a year because I didn't know where to send it. And then I sent it out. And the agent said, well, you know, he thought he could sell it. And I said, fine, because I wrote two more in the meantime. And indeed, he did sell them. So I did no warm-up.
But I did wait. I didn't try until I knew I could do it. I'm a big one for preparation. The only preparation I think you can do for writing is reading. And over the years I've done plenty of reading. But the other thing you should need to do is you're going to write about the stuff of life.
And I think the human element is to experience some of the human element. And I spent quite a bit of time in New York and underground and doing dangerous, dicey things. And every time something would be seemingly difficult, like when I was looking down the wrong end of the gun or tied up in my apartment in New York by a hospital force, I would think, well, I can use this in my book.
And it got me through a lot of very difficult situations, just thinking that if I could just get through this, eventually I was going to have plenty of material for a book. And what I ended up doing was writing for a living.
You wrote, using a first-person point of view, except for a couple of delkert sequences in the Carnelian throne. And it's kind of hard to write first-person. How did you decide to do that?
I think it was, in that case, it was easier. But with Solistra, one has to be a little bit messianic to do a book like that. I really was concerned that when I got into the very abstract stuff, that I must have some way to take them with me.
I wanted them to experience this stuff as closely as possible because of the kinds of things that I was talking about, both the philosophical things and the genetic experience that I wanted to give them.
The Solistra characters are almost like walking jeans. At the time I was quite taken with Edmund Wilson and social biology. I still think some of the things that were valid, although they find out, cast a point where I can agree with them now.
So first-person was the way to go with that book. They said, I see a story. I don't have to manufacture the story. Once I have a character or a group of characters, I can just let it go. By then the work is done and I just write it.
I sort of write it in deep immersion and stay home a lot and don't cook dinner. The cat's screaming. So first-person for that was easier to get you really inside the characters and prepared for things like the multiple worlds that came at the end of that first book.
I was a little bit more of a disciplined to write first-person because one doesn't do it in an essay class, certainly. It's not in college. It just was the way that book wanted to be written.
I don't tend to pay too much attention to the style that I'm writing because I want to make the style fit the piece. So the style develops itself in accordance with the concepts that I want to work with. Sometimes I'll get a very dense style.
Like in Earth Dreams was dense because the concepts were difficult. I knew I was going to deal with those concepts and I needed a style where when I started talking technically it wouldn't be too great a jerk, too different from the stuff that was going on before it.
Also there I was trying to blend the pure logic of hard science with the absolute other side of the brain, illogic of magic, and I needed a way to do it. So the styles develop out of that.
Each group of things I do tend to be very different stylistically from the last. Solista is very different from the Karrion stuff, which is very different from the sanctuary stuff, which is different.
I did a historical with Cal Watkins of Harvard and the Hedite King, which I sold and then reverted and I'm in the process of selling again. And in that book we had translated stuff that had never been seen in English before, Acadian and lots of old Hedite.
And that style was determined by the fact that I knew I was going to be using big chunks of text and I wanted to use it as it transliterated rather than modernizing the translation. So that again was the first person because all the text we had was the first person.
So I let the story determine the style. A lot of times I don't think I choose the story here. I was fine when I'm on the rebound from the amount of hard mathematical homework that I do. I tell myself that the stories take me because otherwise why should I have to work so hard?
Okay. The set, Solista, the planet, it's exceedingly complex. You've got all these relationships, you've got all these politics, inter-world politics, intro world politics, you've got a lot of jargon. You have at the end, you have a dictionary.
Lee Killow said when she writes books, she writes a world book, I mean just describing everything about the world which is often longer than the novel that she writes from it. Did you lay down this world in your head and think it through or did this just come to you as you were writing it because it's so damn complex?
Okay. I have very good memory, my direct memory. I can remember everything that I do. And I can also remember most of what I read, you know, page number and how it looks on the page.
The glossary and the dictionary and the end paper matter, all that stuff was done after High Country was sold at the publisher's request. I didn't have that in the original manuscript at all. What I had and what I always have is a manila folder that I keep the manuscript in and where I jot down notes as to what I have done.
So in other words, as I made up the words, the language, I'd write down the new words on the manila envelope. I don't like to take a lot of notes because I'll lose them. And I just keep it all in my head and I better be damn sure that I remember what's in there.
So I'm very careful about that. But no, I don't do anything like that. I tell you, it's a very, the actual writing for me is a very, very visual experience.
Sometimes I'm just sitting in my doula and now time stuff, you know, hear stuff in there. I mean, if I have to stop to get an air, an air map of a particular place to find out what the route would be, then that'll pull me out of it. Or, you know, how much it costs a particular hotel or what kind of ammunition would be right for this gun or that gun.
Then I have to stop and go and get the data. But where it's all made up, all I have to do is be consistent with myself and logical within the frame. So I keep it in my head where it belongs.
That way I find if I write a lot of stuff first, then I find that I'm in danger of not explaining it well enough to the reader because I already know it so well that I might leave out something crucial.
And this way, as I develop it, you get the same thing that I get. And nothing, if it's logical to me, then it's going to be logical to you. It makes sense to me and if they are in developmental structures.
I'm not dumping a whole bunch of stuff on them and dig dense chunks that I had thought are previous things and I find that it's better for me not to do a lot of that sort of pre-preparation.
The only thing that I do is on a technical level. And as far as plot structure and writing structure, I just do it. I just sit there and by God I'm going to sit there until I get something. It's easier to write the book in face of blank piece of paper for an unknown.
This work turned out to be a tetrology. Is that what you intended when you started it or is that just how the publisher broke it down?
Okay. I did the first one and then I realized I wanted to do some more. And I brought in the structure in my mind to see where it would go. And at the end of the book you look and you see, well, is there more book or is there not book?
Sometimes you really get the feeling that the book is over, especially in a case if the main character dies then your book is over. That will do it every time.
But eventually I think that will be fixed although I don't feel that it's particularly unfinished but I know that I have material for two more.
And it's a matter of I'm going to, I think, revert them from Bantam. I have to find another home for them before I even consider the other two.
And I've been pouring with the idea of doing two more. I sold them in France and Italy. So they're coming out there. And I think they're all out of print at this moment.
And either we'll revert them or they'll do another round of solicitors with hopefully less horrible covers than those.
And we'll see what we can do. But it should be three in three is really what I'm after. It was the first three as a group.
And the fourth one is opens up something else to wish there will be two more. And I don't really want to talk about what happens because it's not quite as much fun.
The other two will be a little more serious in a sense than the others because the characters have matured and their problems are greater, more difficult.
And in a sense more technical. I stopped there because that was A, a good place to stop.
And B, because I needed to do a little more homework in those areas. I've done that homework now and I know where I could take it logically, more philosophically.
But I really didn't write them. The other problem was if you write one thing too long, you can think it's going to wake up there.
I didn't want to wake up there. It's a nice place to visit, but I don't want to live there.
Certain parts of it might be a nice place to visit.
Yeah.
Okay, I'm glad I asked that question because when I read it, the Carnelian Thrones seemed to me a lot different.
And I didn't know if that was my imagination or...
No, this is the start of something else. You know, but it's reasonably complete, I think as it is.
But it's definitely...the form is different and the structure of the book itself is different, but with respect to the stuff.
I mean, it wasn't meant to be just a continuation of the others.
Okay, so in a succinct statement then, yes, there will be a couple of sequels to the Carnelian...I'm sorry, to the Carnelian Throne, okay?
There will be a couple of that. And the mature characters dealing with the skills that they've gained, I think it's worth a shot.
What were you overall trying to say in the Solistria series, if anything?
I was actually trying to come to terms with the fact that logically and mathematically I couldn't come to terms with the incidents that the ESP experienced in my own life.
And some of the more tenuous philosophical intuitions that I was having that I just couldn't state.
There's no other way really to state those concepts on one level.
The relationship of mind comprobability, our connection to time, whether we indeed are co-creators in some sense of the universe in which we're living and we're making a future in the past at once.
And sometimes in particle physics I begin to wonder if the universe isn't just giving us whatever particle we choose to dream up, you know, it's as soon as we think it up then it comes into being.
Because we seem to be going further and further down and every time we go down another level, I mean the quarks split up into little quarks and it's just endless.
And a lot of times you could come up with a good mathematical reason for something, then maybe the universe is convinced and it produces a kind of...I have no idea
of whether that's going to turn out to be what it is, but if indeed it is, if the anthropic principle is anywhere near valid, that it is something like that happening.
That we are in a sense central to creation, which would be nice.
I mean, it's just my egotism.
On another level I want to talk about genetic predisthibitions and very bright people have a particular problem with both human relationships and sexuality and I wanted to talk about that because no matter how intelligent and logical you are at a certain point you have to deal with what is your genetic conditioning and you really get a snoop full of it in a sex act,
a person who is intelligent and monitors what's happening to them as they become around really realizes that there is a different and much more primal person inside each of us.
And I had at that time begun to despair of nurture having anything to do at all with human behavior, thinking that it was almost everything we do seem to me at that point, trying to be genetically prompted.
What is Ed Wilson said that the urge to creativity might be inextricably linked to the desire to own and dominate and that's one of the things that I'm rather, I was sort of born post liberated.
I was the guy, I was the oldest child and I was very intelligent and I was expected to do all the things that any young man is supposed to do.
So I had come to grips with being a post liberated female and these people were trying to get to where I started out in agony.
These women's livers not realizing what they were letting themselves in for, I also wanted to talk about that.
One does have to live in a world with males and females and reproduce and be comfortable with the opposite sex if not with one's own sex.
I had to have a choice with whom I am comfortable and as my life has worked out it's been a real choice.
I tend to have a lot of men's friends and my concerns tend to be mostly those of my work and that brings me into contact with many more men than women.
The Estri Prasanna is a Prasanna that is in no way less than a holy female while being very intelligent and reasonably comfortable with that balance.
So I wanted to talk about it was an injection at that time that I was putting into consciousness to sort of inoculate people against extremes of the female liberation.
And it was that level and then there was just the fun of the biology telling the story.
Okay, the central scientific aspect of it to me was the sorting, the heisting which reminded me of a participatory universe as you've alluded to.
That we can sort through the possibilities and pick the one we want and that seemed to be grounded in some modern physics.
Oh yeah, really well what's the research that we did on?
I managed to pull scores over a year testing my average was 100,000 to one against beating the machine.
So something was obviously happening and since I have my laboratories it's happening in me, it's certainly happening in everybody else.
That's the only way you can know the universe through yourself.
There was plenty of math to pick it up, but the participatory universe concept as far as I then knew did not yet exist as a formulated concept, but some precursors had.
You can go way back into the animus presecratic thought and just information of that sort of free will working in concert with what would be considered the gods in the scene of stuff.
And the math there and what I was feeling about the math there I wanted to do totally in English and that's why I divorced the culture so completely from anything that we might know so that I could bring people to it who had no idea that that was physics,
who had no idea that there was a scientific basis involved and have an experiential reality to just really experience the physics of it and see how they felt about it because to some degree I think all of us must have sort of a willing conspiracy to not be aware of the degree to which we're creating what's going on around us.
And if that fell, it would be nice if we became aware of it so that we could create things that were a little more Torah-like.
The...
I'll make a comment and then you essentially answered my next question about whether it's fantasy or science fiction, but the first time I ran into a participatory universe in one form I think was, you know, that you're familiar with the Stradinger's cat paradox.
And Eugen Wigner said that maybe a conscious signal makes one of the state vectors collapse one way or the other and that's kind of interesting.
Okay, was it fantasy or science fiction? Because it seemed science fiction to me but my goodness it said on the outside, fantasy.
All right.
And what's the difference?
Well, there's a difference, I think it's a conceptual difference. I'm writing pure fantasy in the sanctuary, I think, but it's very historical fantasy.
The difference in that particular case was that Frederick Poles, who was my first editor, who knew what was science fiction left, and the other, I guess, opera-difference was that at the point in time when they came out they could get a big old print run if they called it fantasy.
So it was an editorial difference rather than a real difference, but those covers did not help me in the least get those books to the kind of people that I thought should be reading them.
And between that and the fantasy, I didn't realize, because I was never a fan in the sense of someone who was hooked into the community, that there was this great dichotomy and possibility between the science fiction people and the fantasy people,
and that hardly anyone read both, and there was very almost no converse between the two.
And having an open mind as part of science and dealing with unsolved problems and questions is just as important as showing that you indeed do understand this or that particular principle, which seems right now to be valid until next week it turns out that well it just was spudged back in.
So I don't know if there's a difference for me, unfortunately.
Fantasy right now seems to be where the writers throw that don't do any homework and don't really understand either this world or the principles on which fantasy was originally based, the Homeric tradition and a good sense of history and honor and all those nice things that we don't talk about too much anymore.
And science fiction is where people write who at least have a willingness to take some lip service to a logical mind.
Fantasy used to be a lot better when people were writing it, but right now there's a lot of very mediocre writers writing good and evil fantasy or warmed over Christian mythology, which is not to me what fantasy is about.
I love Conan, you know, original Howard Stoutson, all the real old Stoutson, Homer and Hesse had been bad to me as good fantasy.
Science fiction, when it's good, is great.
The problem exists in science fiction in a different form where the young writers who don't really have a good conceptual basis in science fiction use what I call nuts and bolts, which is just data that they can get from encyclopedia as their science and have a little trick ending in which some scientific principles involved to resolve the plot.
But for me, good science fiction has the sciences as an integral part of the development of the story and you couldn't have the story without the scientific principle or the theoretical questions that you're basing it on.
In other words, if you could take the science out of it and you still got a story, then you shouldn't have science fiction. It should be something else. TV, something like that.
The science fiction just has almost the science and the theory or the world or whatever you want to call it, the structure that you're making it as a central character.
And that's what it does. When it does it frees the mind and allows people to come away with lots of good questions that they can think about rather than providing bad answers which indeed have a very limited lifespan.
We won't see.
Okay, before we leave, Solistra, I want to ask a couple of questions about Estre. She starts off as a what a courtesan. Is that the proper word?
Yeah, I can go over.
And the books, well the first three anyway to me were just this continual rite of passage where she gets up to the God class. Does this in any way reflect the way you went through the post feminism thing or what?
I can make it to the God class.
Not yet, huh?
Not yet, no. I don't know. The character had to be consistent with what she was, right? The biological nature of the Solistrans was such that once I had laid out the structure in the first one, I had to keep it going.
But I am not my books. The heroine, the female lead, which is a lead in the dream dancer thing is really polar opposite of Estre. I was a special athlete from 15 to 19 until I found my mate and then I settled right down.
But, you know, I wasn't trying to give a course in how to do it, but I was trying to discuss ways that males and females could relate to each other.
Given the structure where everyone in Solistra is concerned with genetic goals and their concerns are pretty much replication and power, that's what they're concerned with.
And that is the basis of most human behavior. It's just that we spend a lot of time not looking at the degree to which it affects our decision making on more and more rarefied levels.
It's nice to remember once in a while. I like to look back at those books and remember that at one point I was that well grounded in reality that I didn't take it too far to the abstract there.
And that it stayed pretty much where I put it. The character was slow learning in a sense, but I think if you consider the lifespans involved with those people, everything would have had to been slowed down.
Because if you're just, you know, coming into your adulthood 300, that meant you were probably a child for about 110 years. That's an awful long time for toilet training.
Everything was slowed down with them. And I tried to keep the balance that was inherent in the culture. As I say, after a certain point, the story just goes.
And I don't feel that I don't want to be an editor to the characters. When they start telling me what they're going to do, I had a serious character at one point.
I had gone to a lot of trouble to put that character where I thought he should be doing what I thought he should be doing. And the character got out of story mode and sort of crossed his mental arms and said, well, I wouldn't do that.
We had a discussion. I stopped writing. I had a sort of a split mental discussion with this character for a couple weeks about what he should want and what he should be.
And when that happened, you go with it because you get lucky. That doesn't always happen in the book. Sometimes you really are controlling a great deal of how it results.
And if a character wants to take on a life of his own and discuss it with you, I believe with Dostoevsky, Zarevsky said that he was tyrannical with his characters.
So, Lee Carré says that he makes deals with them. He says, well, if you want to stay in the background for this book, I'll give you one of your own next time.
I've done that too. It made deals with characters. They just remain small in this book. I'll move them over and give them another life and another world.
And when you have that, you're very lucky. I know people never get that and think that the people aren't taking a risk telling them that this.
I know authors who think that writers that speak this way are lying or crazy or both. But it does happen and when it happens, those of us that are in half stewartam, we'll have to get it.
Okay, the engineer says we better flip our tape. Do you want to take a little break or anything while we do it?
Yeah, man.
You know.
And you're doing great. Yes.